Design guide
For use from September 2014
MYP330
International Baccalaureate, Baccalaur?at International and Bachillerato Internacional
are registered trademarks of the International Baccalaureate Organization.
Published May 2014
Published on behalf of the International Baccalaureate Organization, a not-for-profit
educational foundation of 15 Route des Morillons, 1218 Le Grand-Saconnex, Geneva,
Switzerland by the
International Baccalaureate Organization (UK) Ltd
Peterson House, Malthouse Avenue, Cardiff Gate
Cardiff, Wales CF23 8GL
United Kingdom
Website: www.ibo.org
  International Baccalaureate Organization 2014
The International Baccalaureate Organization (known as the IB) offers four high-quality
and challenging educational programmes for a worldwide community of schools, aiming
to create a better, more peaceful world. This publication is one of a range of materials
produced to support these programmes.
The IB may use a variety of sources in its work and checks information to verify accuracy
and authenticity, particularly when using community-based knowledge sources such as
Wikipedia. The IB respects the principles of intellectual property and makes strenuous
efforts to identify and obtain permission before publication from rights holders of all
copyright material used. The IB is grateful for permissions received for material used
in this publication and will be pleased to correct any errors or omissions at the earliest
opportunity.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the prior written permission
of the IB, or as expressly permitted by law or by the IB s own rules and policy. See
http://www.ibo.org/copyright.
IB merchandise and publications can be purchased through the IB store at
http://store.ibo.org.
Email: sales@ibo.org
Published through a generous donation from Sinarmas World Academy
and Jakarta World Academy, Indonesia.
Middle Years Programme
Design guide

Sometimes, instead of laparoscopy, hysteroscopy is carried out. In this case, and the puncture did not have to - all the tools are introduced into the uterus through her cervix. The patient was discharged home after a few hours after surgery.
\ No newline at end of file
IB mission statement
The International Baccalaureate aims to develop inquiring, knowledgeable and caring young people who
help to create a better and more peaceful world through intercultural understanding and respect.
To this end the organization works with schools, governments and international organizations to develop
challenging programmes of international education and rigorous assessment.
These programmes encourage students across the world to become active, compassionate and lifelong
learners who understand that other people, with their differences, can also be right.


Design guide
Contents
Introduction 1
Purpose of this guide 1
Design in the MYP 2
Programme model 2
Nature of design 4
Design across the IB continuum 5
Aims 7
Objectives 8
Planning a progression of learning 10
The MYP design cycle 12
Interdisciplinary learning 14
MYP projects 15
Written and taught curriculum 16
Requirements 16
Planning the design curriculum 18
Teaching and learning through inquiry 20
Subject-specific guidance 27
Assessed curriculum 30
Alignment of objectives and criteria 30
Assessment criteria overview 31
Design assessment criteria: Year 1 32
Design assessment criteria: Year 3 36
Design assessment criteria: Year 5 40
eAssessment 47
Appendices 48
Related concepts in design 48
Design glossary 49
MYP command terms for design 51
Selected reading 52

Design guide 1
Introduction
Purpose of this guide
For use from September 2014 or January 2015, depending on the start of the school year.
This document provides the framework for teaching and learning in design in the Middle Years
Programme (MYP) and must be read and used in conjunction with the document MYP: From principles into
practice (May 2014), which includes:
 	 general information about the programme
 	 the MYP unit planner, with guidance for developing the curriculum that is relevant for all subject
groups
 	 detailed information about approaches to learning
 	 advice that supports access and inclusion (including accommodations for students with learning
support requirements)
 	 a statement on academic honesty.
In MYP subject guides, requirements appear in a text box like this one.
Additional resources
Teacher support materials (TSMs) are available in the online curriculum centre (http://occ.ibo.org). The
TSM for design contains support for developing the written, taught and assessed curriculum. It provides
examples of good practice including course overviews, assessment tasks and markschemes, as well as
student work with teacher comments.
An optional process of externally moderated assessment can lead to IB MYP Results for design courses, and
these results can contribute to the awarding of an IB MYP Certificate. More information is available in the
annual publication Handbook of procedures for the Middle Years Programme.
A range of publications that support the MYP are available at the IB store (http://store.ibo.org).
Acknowledgments
The IB gratefully acknowledges the generous contributions of IB World Schools and a global community of
educators who collaborate in the development of the Middle Years Programme.
2 Design guide
Design in the MYP
Programme model
Figure 1
Middle Years Programme model
The MYP is designed for students aged 11 to 16. It provides a framework of learning that encourages students
to become creative, critical and reflective thinkers. The MYP emphasizes intellectual challenge, encouraging
students to make connections between their studies in traditional subjects and the real world. It fosters the
development of skills for communication, intercultural understanding and global engagement essential
qualities for young people who are becoming global leaders.
The MYP is flexible enough to accommodate the demands of most national or local curriculums. It builds
upon the knowledge, skills and attitudes developed in the IB Primary Years Programme (PYP) and prepares
students to meet the academic challenges of the IB Diploma Programme (DP) and the IB Career-related
Certificate (IBCC).
The MYP:
 	 addresses holistically students  intellectual, social, emotional and physical well-being
 	 provides students opportunities to develop the knowledge, attitudes and skills they need in order
to manage complexity and take responsible action for the future
Programme model
Design guide 3
 	 ensures breadth and depth of understanding through study in eight subject groups
 	 requires the study of at least two languages to support students in understanding their own cultures
and those of others
 	 empowers students to participate in service with the community
 	 helps to prepare students for further education, the workplace and a lifetime of learning.
4 Design guide
Design in the MYP
Nature of design
Design, and the resultant development of new technologies, has given rise to profound changes in
society: transforming how we access and process information; how we adapt our environment; how we
communicate with others; how we are able to solve problems; how we work and live.
Design is the link between innovation and creativity, taking thoughts and exploring the possibilities and
constraints associated with products or systems, allowing them to redefine and manage the generation of
further thought through prototyping, experimentation and adaptation. It is human-centred and focuses on
the needs, wants and limitations of the end user.
Competent design is not only within the reach of a small set of uniquely skilled individuals, but can be
achieved by all. The use of well-established design principles and processes increases the probability that a
design will be successful. To do this, designers use a wide variety of principles which, taken together, make
up what is known as the design cycle.
 	 Designers adapt their approach to different design situations, but they have a common understanding
of the process necessary to form valid and suitable solutions.
 	 A designer has a role and responsibility to the community and the environment. Their decisions can
have a huge impact and, therefore, their ethics and morals can and should be questioned regularly.
 	 A designer should have the ability to maintain an unbiased view of a situation and evaluate a situation
objectively, highlighting the strengths and weaknesses of a common product or system.
 	 Good communication is a key trait of any good designer through visual and oral presentation.
Designing requires an individual to be imaginative and creative, while having a substantial knowledge
base of important factors that will aid or constrain the process. Decisions made need to be supported by
adequate and appropriate research and investigation. Designers must adopt an approach that allows them
to think creatively, while conforming to the requirements of a design specification.
Both the ideas of design and the process of design can only occur in a human context. Design is carried out
by a community of people from a wide variety of backgrounds and traditions, and this has clearly influenced
the way design has progressed at different times. It is important to understand, however, that to design is
to be involved in a community of inquiry with certain common beliefs, methodologies, understandings and
processes.
MYP design challenges all students to apply practical and creative thinking skills to solve design problems;
encourages students to explore the role of design in both historical and contemporary contexts; and raises
students  awareness of their responsibilities when making design decisions and taking action.
Inquiry and problem-solving are at the heart of the subject group. MYP design requires the use of the
design cycle as a tool, which provides the methodology used to structure the inquiry and analysis of
problems, the development of feasible solutions, the creation of solutions, and the testing and evaluation
of the solution. In MYP design, a solution can be defined as a model, prototype, product or system that
students have developed and created independently.
A well-planned design programme enables students to develop not only practical skills but also strategies
for creative and critical thinking.
The MYP expects all students to become actively involved in, and to focus on, the whole design process
rather than on the final product/solution.
Design guide 5
Design in the MYP
Design across the IB continuum
The IB continuum of international education provides a progression of learning for students aged 3 to 19. In
the IB Primary Years Programme (PYP), teaching and learning experiences challenge students to be curious,
ask questions, explore and interact with the environment physically, socially and intellectually to construct
meaning and refine their understanding. Even when there is no design component in the PYP, the use of
structured inquiry is a precursor to the problem-solving and inquiry-based approach of MYP design. MYP
design aims to build on what students learn and do in the PYP and other student-centred programmes of
primary education. There are no prior formal learning requirements.
MYP design courses help specifically to prepare students for the study of computer science, design
technology and information technology in a global society (ITGS) in the Diploma Programme (DP).
Computer science requires an understanding of the fundamental concepts of computational thinking, as
well as knowledge of how computers and other digital devices operate.
Design technology aims to develop a high level of design literacy by enabling students to develop criticalthinking
and design skills, which they can apply in a practical context.
ITGS is the study and evaluation of the impacts of information technology (IT) on individuals and society.
Figure 2 shows the IB continuum pathways to DP computer science, design technology and ITGS.
Diploma
Programme
Middle Years
Programme
Primary Years
Programme
Design
technology
Design
Arts ICT
Computer
science ITGS
Science
Figure 2
IB continuum pathway to design-related Diploma Programme courses
Design across the IB continuum
6 Design guide
MYP design also helps to prepare students for overall success in the DP, and connects directly with their
participation in creativity, action, service (CAS) and the extended essay. In CAS, students continue to
develop skills in design and evaluation that they use to undertake new challenges, design and plan activities
and solve problems in a creative way.
The knowledge, skills and attitudes that students develop in design courses provide a meaningful
foundation for further study and help to prepare students for:
 	 careers in fashion, food, graphic, industrial, instructional, multimedia, product, publications, video
game and web design
 	 architecture
 	 education
 	 roles in engineering, manufacturing, advertising and media industries
 	 project management among others.
Design guide 7
Design in the MYP
Aims
The aims of all MYP subjects state what a teacher may expect to teach and what a student may expect to
experience and learn. These aims suggest how the student may be changed by the learning experience.
The aims of MYP design are to encourage and enable students to:
 	 enjoy the design process, develop an appreciation of its elegance and power
 	 develop knowledge, understanding and skills from different disciplines to design and create solutions
to problems using the design cycle
 	 use and apply technology effectively as a means to access, process and communicate information,
model and create solutions, and to solve problems
 	 develop an appreciation of the impact of design innovations for life, global society and environments
 	 appreciate past, present and emerging design within cultural, political, social, historical and
environmental contexts
 	 develop respect for others  viewpoints and appreciate alternative solutions to problems
 	 act with integrity and honesty, and take responsibility for their own actions developing effective
working practices.
8 Design guide
Design in the MYP
Objectives
The objectives of any MYP subject state the specific targets that are set for learning in the subject. They
define what the student will be able to accomplish as a result of studying the subject.
The objectives of MYP design encompass the factual, conceptual, procedural and metacognitive dimensions
of knowledge.
Each objective is elaborated by a number of strands; a strand is an aspect or indicator of the learning
expectation.
Subject groups must address all strands of all four objectives at least twice in each year of the MYP.
The objectives for years 1, 3 and 5 of the programme are provided in the guide and their use is mandatory.
These objectives relate directly to the assessment criteria found in the  Assessed curriculum  section of this
guide.
Together these objectives reflect the knowledge, skills and attitudes that students need in order to engage
with and solve complex, real-life problems in both familiar and unfamiliar contexts; they represent essential
aspects of design methodology.
A Inquiring and analysing
Students are presented with a design situation, from which they identify a problem that needs to be solved.
They analyse the need for a solution and conduct an inquiry into the nature of the problem.
In order to reach the aims of design, students should be able to:
i. explain and justify the need for a solution to a problem for a specified client/target audience
ii. identify and prioritize the primary and secondary research needed to develop a solution to the
problem
iii. analyse a range of existing products that inspire a solution to the problem
iv. develop a detailed design brief which summarizes the analysis of relevant research.
B Developing ideas
Students write a detailed specification, which drives the development of a solution. They present the
solution.
In order to reach the aims of design, students should be able to:
i. develop a design specification which clearly states the success criteria for the design of a solution
ii. develop a range of feasible design ideas which can be correctly interpreted by others
Objectives
Design guide 9
iii. present the final chosen design and justify its selection
iv. develop accurate and detailed planning drawings/diagrams and outline the requirements for the
creation of the chosen solution.
C Creating the solution
Students plan the creation of the chosen solution and follow the plan to create a prototype sufficient for
testing and evaluation.
In order to reach the aims of design, students should be able to:
i. construct a logical plan, which describes the efficient use of time and resources, sufficient for peers to
be able to follow to create the solution
ii. demonstrate excellent technical skills when making the solution
iii. follow the plan to create the solution, which functions as intended
iv. fully justify changes made to the chosen design and plan when making the solution
v. present the solution as a whole, either:
a. in electronic form, or
b. through photographs of the solution from different angles, showing details.
D Evaluating
Students design tests to evaluate the solution, carry out those tests and objectively evaluate its success.
Students identify areas where the solution could be improved and explain how their solution will impact on
the client or target audience.
In order to reach the aims of design, students should be able to:
i. design detailed and relevant testing methods, which generate data, to measure the success of the
solution
ii. critically evaluate the success of the solution against the design specification
iii. explain how the solution could be improved
iv. explain the impact of the solution on the client/target audience.
10 Design guide
Design in the MYP
Planning a progression of learning
Year 1
In order to reach the aims of
design, students should be
able to:
Year 3
In order to reach the aims of
design, students should be
able to:
Year 5
In order to reach the aims of
design, students should be
able to:
Objective A: Inquiring and analysing
i. explain and justify the
need for a solution to a
problem
ii. state and prioritize the
main points of research
needed to develop a
solution to the problem
iii. describe the main features
of an existing product that
inspires a solution to the
problem
iv. present the main findings
of relevant research.
i. explain and justify the
need for a solution to a
problem
ii. construct a research
plan, which states and
prioritizes the primary
and secondary research
needed to develop a
solution to the problem
iii. analyse a group of similar
products that inspire a
solution to the problem
iv. develop a design brief,
which presents the
analysis of relevant
research.
i. explain and justify the
need for a solution to a
problem for a specified
client/target audience
ii. identify and prioritize the
primary and secondary
research needed to
develop a solution to the
problem
iii. analyse a range of existing
products that inspire a
solution to the problem
iv. develop a detailed design
brief, which summarizes
the analysis of relevant
research.
Objective B: Developing ideas
i. develop a list of success
criteria for the solution
ii. present feasible design
ideas, which can be
correctly interpreted by
others
iii. present the chosen design
iv. create a planning
drawing/diagram, which
outlines the main details
for making the chosen
solution.
i. develop a design
specification, which
outlines the success
criteria for the design of a
solution based on the data
collected
ii. present a range of feasible
design ideas, which can be
correctly interpreted by
others
iii. present the chosen design
and outline the reasons for
its selection
iv. develop accurate planning
drawings/diagrams and
outline requirements for
the creation of the chosen
solution.
i. develop a design
specification, which clearly
states the success criteria
for the design of a solution
ii. develop a range of feasible
design ideas, which can be
correctly interpreted by
others
iii. present the chosen design
and justify its selection
iv. develop accurate and
detailed planning
drawings/diagrams and
outline the requirements
for the creation of the
chosen solution.
Planning a progression of learning
Design guide 11
Year 1
In order to reach the aims of
design, students should be
able to:
Year 3
In order to reach the aims of
design, students should be
able to:
Year 5
In order to reach the aims of
design, students should be
able to:
Objective C: Creating the solution
i. outline a plan, which
considers the use of
resources and time,
sufficient for peers to be
able to follow to create the
solution
ii. demonstrate excellent
technical skills when
making the solution
iii. follow the plan to create
the solution, which
functions as intended
iv. list the changes made to
the chosen design and
plan when making the
solution
v. present the solution as a
whole.
i. construct a logical plan,
which outlines the
efficient use of time and
resources, sufficient for
peers to be able to follow
to create the solution
ii. demonstrate excellent
technical skills when
making the solution
iii. follow the plan to create
the solution, which
functions as intended
iv. explain changes made to
the chosen design and
plan when making the
solution
v. present the solution as a
whole.
i. construct a logical plan,
which describes the
efficient use of time and
resources, sufficient for
peers to be able to follow
to create the solution
ii. demonstrate excellent
technical skills when
making the solution
iii. follow the plan to create
the solution, which
functions as intended
iv. fully justify changes made
to the chosen design and
plan when making the
solution
v. present the solution as a
whole.
Objective D: Evaluating
i. outline simple, relevant
testing methods, which
generate data, to measure
the success of the solution
ii. outline the success of the
solution against the design
specification
iii. outline how the solution
could be improved
iv. outline the impact of the
solution on the client/
target audience.
i. describe detailed and
relevant testing methods,
which generate accurate
data, to measure the
success of the solution
ii. explain the success of the
solution against the design
specification
iii. describe how
the solution could be
improved
iv. describe the impact
of the solution on the
client/target audience.
i. design detailed and
relevant testing methods,
which generate data, to
measure the success of the
solution
ii. critically evaluate the
success of the solution
against the design
specification
iii. explain how the solution
could be improved
iv. explain the impact of the
solution on the client/
target audience.
12 Design guide
Design in the MYP
The MYP design cycle
Inquiring and
analysing
Evaluating
Creating the
solution
Developing
ideas
Identify and
prioritize the
research
Analyse existing
products
Explain and
justify the need
Explain the
impact of the
solution
Explain how
the solution
could be
improved
Evaluate the
success of the
solution
Design testing
methods
Develop a
design brief
Develop a
design
specification
Develop design
ideas
Present the
chosen design
Develop planning
drawings/
diagrams
Construct a
logical plan
Demonstrate
technical skills
Follow the
plan to make
the solution
Justify changes
made to the
design
Figure 3
The MYP design cycle
Every designer may approach a problem in a different way. Depending on their specialism, designers tend
to have their own methodology, but some general activities are common to all designers. The design cycle
model underpins the design process.
The design cycle model (Figure 3) represents the MYP design methodology of how designers develop
products. The process is divided into four stages: inquiring and analysing; developing ideas; creating
the solution; evaluating. This incremental process allows the designer to go from identifying a design
opportunity to the testing and evaluation of a solution. This process leads to the creation of solutions that
solve a problem.
The MYP design cycle
Design guide 13
It is important to note that, while the design cycle includes several successive stages, the design cycle is an
iterative and cyclical process. When using the design cycle, students will often need to revisit a previous
stage before they can complete the stage they are currently working on. Solving design problems is not
always a linear process.
14 Design guide
Design in the MYP
Interdisciplinary learning
Interdisciplinary teaching and learning is grounded in individual subject groups and disciplines, but extends
disciplinary understanding in ways that are:
 	 integrative bringing together concepts, methods, or modes of communication from two or more
subject groups, disciplines, or established areas of expertise to develop new perspectives
 	 purposeful connecting disciplines to solve real-world problems, create products or address
complex issues in ways that would have been unlikely through a single approach.
Interdisciplinary teaching and learning builds a connected curriculum that addresses the developmental
needs of students in the MYP. It prepares students for further academic (inter)disciplinary study and for life
in an increasingly interconnected world.
The MYP uses concepts and contexts as starting points for meaningful integration and transfer of knowledge
across subject groups and disciplines. Fostering interdisciplinary teaching and learning in MYP schools (July
2014) contains more information, including a detailed process for planning and recording interdisciplinary
units.
MYP schools are responsible for engaging students in at least one collaboratively-planned
interdisciplinary unit for each year of the programme.
MYP design offers many opportunities for interdisciplinary teaching and learning. Possible interdisciplinary
units in this subject group could include inquiries into:
 	 relationships between athletic performance and technological innovation/design (physical and health
education)
 	 scientific and aesthetic concepts and principles used to inform the development of design solutions
(sciences and arts)
 	 interactive multimedia products used to communicate literary concepts (language and literature)
 	 historical and cultural developments of a product or system (individuals and societies).
Interdisciplinary learning can take place through large and small-scale learning engagements. Authentic
interdisciplinary learning often requires critical reflection and detailed collaborative planning. However,
teachers and students can also make interdisciplinary connections through spontaneous learning
experiences and conversations.
All MYP subject group teachers are responsible for developing meaningful ongoing opportunities
for interdisciplinary teaching and learning.
Design guide 15
Design in the MYP
MYP projects
The MYP community project (for students in years 3 or 4) and MYP personal project (for students in year 5)
aim to encourage and enable sustained inquiry within a global context that generates new insights and
deeper understanding. In these culminating experiences, students develop confidence as principled,
lifelong learners. They grow in their ability to consider their own learning, communicate effectively and take
pride in their accomplishments.
Courses in design help students to develop key approaches to learning (ATL) that lead to success and
enjoyment in MYP projects. In this subject group, students have important opportunities to practise
ATL skills, especially creativity and communication. Creating novel solutions to authentic problems and
designing improvements to existing products are essential aspects of design.
From their learning experiences in this subject group, students can find inspiration for their projects. The
skills and experience they develop within design equips them to approach a variety of projects using the
design cycle as a structured methodology for problem-solving and project management. Design teachers
provide an important resource for any student whose project focuses on solving a problem.
Design offers many opportunities for learning through action. Inspiration from design for community
projects and personal projects might include inquiries into:
 	 design methodologies, organizations, heroes or movements
 	 important personal, community or global issues, problems and solutions
 	 the development of sustainable solutions to everyday problems
 	 improving lives in the school, local community or wider world through the development of new
technologies.
16 Design guide
Written and taught curriculum
Requirements
Teaching hours
Schools must allocate the teaching hours necessary to meet the requirements of MYP design.
The MYP requires at least 50 hours of teaching time for each subject area in each year of the
programme.
In practice more time is often necessary to meet subject area aims and objectives and to provide for the
sustained, concurrent teaching that enables interdisciplinary study.
For students pursuing IB MYP Results that can contribute to the awarding of the IB MYP Certificate, design
courses should include at least 70 teaching hours in each of the final two years of the programme (MYP
year 4 and MYP year 5).
The teaching of information and communication technology (ICT) skills should not be confused with or take
the place of a digital design course. ICT comprises of tools used to develop digital design solutions.
Organizing design in the school
In order to give the students an opportunity to meet the MYP design objectives at the highest level, teachers
should plan a balanced curriculum that includes significant content. Design courses can be offered:
 	 as a distinct digital and/or product design course
 	 as a series of distinct digital and/or product design courses
 	 as a single course which combines digital and product design.
Digital design courses use the design cycle to solve problems through the use of a computer system. The
study of digital design equips students to create computer-generated digital products/solutions to solve
a problem and meet a perceived need. Two-dimensional (2D) tangible solutions created using computeraided
manufacturing techniques are typically the result of a digital design course. Distinct digital design
courses include web design, interactive media design, programming and control, and so on.
Product design courses use the design cycle to solve problems through the use of tools, materials and
systems. The study of product design equips students to manipulate a variety of materials to create tangible
products/solutions to solve a problem and meet a need. Three-dimensional (3D) tangible solutions made
using computer-aided manufacturing techniques are typically the result of a product design course. Distinct
product design courses include food product design, fashion design, electronic product design, engineering
design, and so on.
A combined digital and product design course uses the design cycle and combines knowledge, skills,
techniques and materials of both digital and product design to develop products/solutions that solve a
problem and meet a need. Combined courses include robotics, graphic product design, interface design,
and so on.
Requirements
Design guide 17
All MYP design courses must ensure that students:
 	 use the design cycle to structure projects
 	 work towards meeting the aims and objectives of MYP design.
18 Design guide
Written and taught curriculum
Planning the design curriculum
IB World Schools are responsible for developing and structuring MYP design courses that provide
opportunities for students to meet the aims and objectives of the programme. Each school s circumstances,
including local and national curriculum requirements, determine the organization of design within the
school.
The MYP standards and practices require schools to facilitate and promote collaborative planning for the
purpose of curriculum development and review.
Design objectives for years 1 to 5 of the curriculum provide continuity and outline a progression of
learning. These objectives guide teachers in making decisions about developmentally appropriate learning
experiences, including formative and summative assessments.
 	 As they develop the vertical articulation of design over the years of the programme, teachers should
plan increasingly complex units of work that encompass multiple objectives. However, within these
units, discrete tasks or smaller units of work might concentrate on specific objectives or individual
strands.
 	 Design courses offer many opportunities to build interdisciplinary connections across the curriculum.
Horizontal articulation for each year of the programme should coordinate teaching and learning
across courses in design, as well as identify shared conceptual understandings and approaches to
learning (ATL) that span multiple subject groups and help to create a coherent learning experience for
students throughout the year.
All objectives must be developed in each year of the programme at the appropriate level. In planning the
design curriculum, teachers will need to deconstruct the objectives so that they build, during years 1 4,
towards the highest level in the final year of the programme, providing for continuity and progression in
each objective. The objectives and interim objectives in this guide will guide teachers in making decisions
about the choice of content and learning experiences offered to students, including the types of assessment
that are appropriate for the students  particular stage of development.
In the final year of the programme, the curriculum should provide students with the opportunity to achieve
the highest descriptor levels in the final assessment criteria.
Table 1 shows how the teaching and learning experiences and the students  expected outcomes in design
should progress from the earlier years of to the final years of the MYP.
MYP year 1 MYP year 3 MYP year 5
Emphasis placed on individual
strands of the objectives.
Emphasis placed on addressing
individual objectives.
The objectives are fully
addressed.
Students explore contrived,
teacher-led design challenges set
in familiar contexts.
Students explore identified, reallife
problems set in familiar and
unfamiliar contexts.
Students independently
explore complex real-life
problems set in unfamiliar
contexts.
Planning the design curriculum
Design guide 19
MYP year 1 MYP year 3 MYP year 5
Students design for themselves. Students design products for
familiar groups of people.
Students design products
for a client or an identified
target audience.
Students focus on skill
development through focused
tasks.
Students focus on advanced skill
development through projects
and short, focused tasks.
Students utilize a wide range
of skills, developed through
the previous years and apply
them to a wide range of
design situations.
Students are guided through units
using structured templates.
Students can manage their own
work organizing their time and
folio appropriately.
Students independently
manage their own work.
Teacher as leader and trainer. Teacher as guide and advisor. Teacher as facilitator.
Table 1
Progression from MYP year 1 to year 5
Resources
MYP design encourages the use of practical work to develop problem-solving and design-specific skills. The
circumstances specific to individual schools will determine the number and kind of resources available for
the development of design courses. However, whatever the course(s) developed, schools are responsible for
ensuring the conditions for a safe working environment.
Group work
In many circumstances, students will want to, or need to, work in groups for their design units of work.
However, it is important to ensure that every member of the group benefits from the dynamics of the social
interaction and the group-work learning experience. In the case of group work, teachers should be able to
identify each student s role and responsibilities to ensure that he or she makes a contribution, and to assess
each student s learning at each stage of the design cycle.
20 Design guide
Written and taught curriculum
Teaching and learning through inquiry
Inquiry, in the broadest sense, is the process that people use to move to deeper levels of understanding.
Inquiry involves speculating, exploring, questioning and connecting. In all IB programmes, inquiry develops
curiosity and promotes critical and creative thinking.
The MYP structures sustained inquiry in design by developing conceptual understanding in global
contexts. Teachers and students develop a statement of inquiry and use inquiry questions to explore
the subject. Through their inquiry, students develop specific interdisciplinary and disciplinary approaches
to learning skills.
Conceptual understanding
A concept is a  big idea  a principle or notion that is enduring, the significance of which goes beyond
particular origins, subject matter or place in time. Concepts represent the vehicle for students  inquiry
into the issues and ideas of personal, local and global significance, providing the means by which they can
explore the essence of design.
Concepts have an important place in the structure of knowledge that requires students and teachers to
think with increasing complexity as they organize and relate facts and topics.
Concepts express understanding that students take with them into lifelong adventures of learning. They
help students to develop principles, generalizations and theories. Students use conceptual understanding
as they solve problems, analyse issues, and evaluate decisions that can have an impact on themselves, their
communities and the wider world.
In the MYP, conceptual understanding is framed by prescribed key and related concepts. Teachers
must use these concepts to develop the curriculum. Schools may identify and develop additional
concepts to meet local circumstances and curriculum requirements.
Key concepts
Key concepts promote the development of a broad curriculum. They represent big ideas that are both
relevant within and across disciplines and subjects. Inquiry into key concepts can facilitate connections
between and among:
 	 courses within the design subject group (intra-disciplinary learning)
 	 other subject groups (interdisciplinary learning).
Table 2 lists the key concepts to be explored across the MYP. The key concepts contributed by the study of
design are communication, communities, development, and systems.
Teaching and learning through inquiry
Design guide 21
Aesthetics Change Communication Communities
Connections Creativity Culture Development
Form Global interactions Identity Logic
Perspective Relationships Time, place and space Systems
Table 2
MYP key concepts
These key concepts provide a framework for design, informing units of work and helping to organize
teaching and learning.
Communication is the exchange or transfer of signals, facts, ideas and symbols. It requires a sender, a
message and an intended receiver. Communication involves the activity of conveying information or
meaning. Effective communication requires a common  language  (which may be written, spoken or nonverbal).
While exploring the concept of communication, students develop an awareness and understanding of
how, why and when we need to ensure that clear messages are given and received throughout the design
process. It ensures that ideas can be communicated clearly and each person involved in the development
of an idea from conception to use has a common and consistent understanding of the solution and its
function. Communication drives invention to become innovation.
When inquiring and analysing, students need to communicate with clients and target markets to identify
the design need. When developing ideas, students engage in internal dialogue, using design sketches and
models to think through the feasibility of their ideas. When creating the solution, students need to develop
clear plans that can be followed easily. The final product must also clearly communicate its intent and how
a user interacts with it.
Communities are groups that exist in proximity defined by space, time or relationship. Communities
include, for example, groups of people sharing particular characteristics, beliefs or values, as well as groups
of interdependent organisms living together in a specific habitat.
Through MYP design, students will develop an understanding that a solution to a problem for one
community will create problems for another, some on a small or even personal scale, while others may be
far-reaching, affecting communities thousands of miles away or the global community.
When establishing the need and developing the design brief, the student always considers the community,
whether this is a community that affects the design (target audience) or one that is affected by it. When
developing ideas, engagement with the target audience and client drives the development to ensure it
is fit-for-purpose, and the student must engage with the communities that effect and are affected by the
solution when evaluating its effectiveness in solving the problem.
Development is the act or process of growth, progress or evolution, sometimes through iterative
improvements.
All ideas need refinement, through development, to become successful, appropriate and feasible. The
development of solutions allows problems to be solved with greater success.
Even though the name suggests that the main focus of development would be found in developing ideas,
students have to develop research plans as and when they realize that there is further information they
need in order to solve the problem. Students constantly adapt and change their plans when creating the
solution, dependent on the thoroughness of their planning and, when evaluating, students develop testing
methods to assess the success of the solution.
Teaching and learning through inquiry
22 Design guide
Systems are sets of interacting or interdependent components. Systems provide structure and order in
human, natural and built environments. Systems can be static or dynamic, simple or complex.
While exploring the concept of systems, students develop an awareness and understanding that everything
is connected to a single system or multiple systems. Products and solutions are systems of components
combined to carry out a specific function. Systems also structure processes: the design cycle is an example
of a system. Open loop systems have an input, process and output. Closed loop systems have an input,
process, output and mechanism for feedback.
Input Process Output
Input Process Output
Feedback
Open loop system
Closed loop system
Figure 4
Open and closed loop systems
The student designs and develops systems for testing products when inquiring and analysing, and when
developing testing methods for evaluating. Throughout developing ideas and creating the solution,
students will develop a system or systems to solve that problem in the form of a product or solution. This is
an inherent part of each objective.
Related concepts
Related concepts promote deep learning. They are grounded in specific disciplines and are useful for
exploring key concepts in greater detail. Inquiry into related concepts helps students develop more complex
and sophisticated conceptual understanding. Related concepts may arise from the subject matter of a unit
or the craft of a subject its features and processes.
Teaching and learning through inquiry
Design guide 23
Table 3 lists the related concepts for the study of design.
Related concepts in design
Adaptation Collaboration Ergonomics
Evaluation Form Function
Innovation Invention Markets and trends
Perspective Resources Sustainability
Table 3
Related concepts in design
The appendix contains a glossary of these related concepts for design.
Global contexts for teaching and learning
Global contexts direct learning towards independent and shared inquiry into our common humanity and
shared guardianship of the planet. Using the world as the broadest context for learning, MYP design can
develop meaningful explorations of:
 	 identities and relationships
 	 orientation in space and time
 	 personal and cultural expression
 	 scientific and technical innovation
 	 globalization and sustainability
 	 fairness and development.
Teachers must identify a global context for teaching and learning, or develop additional contexts
that help students explore the relevance of their inquiry (why it matters).
Many inquiries into design concepts naturally focus on scientific and technical innovation. However, courses
in this subject group should over time offer students multiple opportunities to explore all MYP global
contexts in relationship to the aims and objectives of the subject group.
Statements of inquiry
Statements of inquiry set conceptual understanding in a global context in order to frame classroom inquiry
and direct purposeful learning. Table 4 shows some possible statements of inquiry for MYP design units.
Teaching and learning through inquiry
24 Design guide
Statement of inquiry Key concept
Related concepts
Global context
Possible project/study
A local invention can diffuse
into a global market through
successful and targeted
communication.
 	 Communication
 	 Invention, innovation,
markets and trends
 	 Orientation in space and
time
 	 Promotion of a product/
service within a new
market sector/segment
Timely interaction with
clients using appropriate
communication techniques
drives design decisions.
 	 Communication
 	 Collaboration
 	 Personal and cultural
expression
 	 Developing any digital
or tangible product
that focused on
communication with a
specific client
Communities can have many
different perspectives that
influence the way ideas develop
and new discoveries are made.
 	 Communities
 	 Perspective
 	 Scientific and technical
innovation
 	 Development of software
for learning or a digital
learning environment
Designers adapt the form
in which information is
communicated in order to make
it accessible to the end-user.
 	 Communities
 	 Adaptation, form
 	 Identities and relationships
 	 Developing methods of
communication used
to teach, for example:
resources for a flipped
classroom; interactive
learning
Fashion products can be
influenced by developments
in technology, which enhance
their form and function while
still meeting ergonomic
requirements.
 	 Development
 	 Ergonomics, form,
function
 	 Scientific and technical
innovation
 	 Smart materials and
fashion products
(thermochromic ink,
wearable electronics)
Waste from one product can
be used as a raw material
for another, which results in
developing a resource neutral
process.
 	 Development
 	 Resources, sustainability
 	 Globalization and
sustainability
 	 Developing closed loop
manufacturing systems
 	 Recycling and reusing
waste
 	 Design for disassembly
Systems that are designed to
meet an individual s ergonomic
requirements can increase their
ability to function within the
world.
 	 Systems
 	 Ergonomics, function
 	 Fairness and development
 	 Design for disabled
 	 Enhancing human
function
Table 4
Example statements of inquiry
Teaching and learning through inquiry
Design guide 25
Inquiry questions
Teachers and students use statements of inquiry to help them identify factual, conceptual and debatable
inquiry questions. Inquiry questions give direction to teaching and learning, and they help to organize and
sequence learning experiences.
Table 5 shows some possible inquiry questions for MYP design units.
Factual questions:
Remembering facts and topics
Conceptual questions:
Analysing big ideas
Debatable questions:
Evaluating perspectives and
developing theories
 	 Which electronic
components can be used
to create a sensory circuit?
 	 What are the general rules
of web design?
 	 How can the nutritional
value of a food product be
determined?
 	 What are the different
aspects of form?
 	 How do inventions impact
our lives?
 	 What is the value of
negative space?
 	 Can digital products be
sustainable?
 	 When is form more
important than function?
 	 Should all products be
designed for everyone?
 	 Are any ideas new, or are
they new versions of old
designs?
Table 5
Examples of factual, conceptual and debatable questions
Approaches to learning
All MYP units of work offer opportunities for students to develop and practise ATL skills. ATL skills provide
valuable support for students working to meet the subject group s aims and objectives.
 	 ATL skills are grouped into five categories that span the IB continuum of international education.
IB programmes identify discrete skills in each category that can be introduced, practised and
consolidated in the classroom and beyond.
 	 While ATL skills are relevant across all MYP subject groups, teachers may also identify ATL skill
indicators especially relevant for, or unique to, a particular subject group or course.
 	 Table 6 suggests some of the indicators that can be important in design.
Category Skill indicator
Thinking skills Analyse products and suggest how to improve them.
Social skills Demonstrate active listening when interviewing clients.
Communication skills Develop detailed design drawings for a manufacturer.
Self-management skills Plan the creation of a solution.
Research skills Find out how to translate 2D storyboards into 3D animations.
Table 6
Examples of design-specific skill indicators
Teaching and learning through inquiry
26 Design guide
Well-designed learning engagements and assessments provide rich opportunities for students to practise
and demonstrate ATL skills. Each MYP unit explicitly identifies ATL skills around which teaching and learning
can focus, and through which students can authentically demonstrate what they are able to do. Formative
assessments provide important feedback for developing discrete skills, and many ATL skills support students
as they demonstrate their achievements in summative assessments of subject group objectives.
Table 7 lists some specific ATL skills that students can demonstrate through performances of understanding
in design.
Approaches to learning (ATL)
Thinking (critical thinking): observe users interact with a solution in order to evaluate its success
Communication (information literacy): evaluate sources of secondary information to ensure their
reliability and relevance
Table 7
Examples of design demonstrations of ATL skills
Design guide 27
Written and taught curriculum
Subject-specific guidance
General guidance
The specific content of an MYP design course will differ according to the local or national circumstances.
However, all MYP design courses should allow students to:
 	 meet the aims and objectives of MYP design by the end of the programme
 	 use the design cycle to develop intellectual and practical approaches to problem-solving
 	 inquire into design problems and establish the need for a solution
 	 establish design specifications for products/solutions through analysis of the problem and need
 	 generate feasible ideas and develop them into products/solutions of appropriate sophistication
 	 develop technical (practical) skills to manipulate digital and/or physical materials
 	 test and evaluate products/solutions to analyse their effectiveness at solving the problem or meeting
the need.
Time allocation
In order to complete 2 3 design projects in year 5 that allow students to meet the objectives of the course,
each project should be allocated at least 15 20 hours of teaching time. This time allocation should allow
students to create products/solutions that are sufficiently sophisticated and complex. As a guide, the time
should be split equally between addressing each objective. Such a division of time should provide students
with the necessary time to work towards achieving the highest achievement levels in all criteria, and not to
use all of the available time on creating their solution.
However, in earlier years, the proportion of time devoted to the development of practical, technical skills
should be higher. This increased allocation of time will facilitate the development of skills that the student
will require to work independently in years 4 and 5 of the programme.
Class size
MYP courses in design require schools to plan for class sizes small enough to ensure a learning environment
characterized by:
 	 adequate supervision
 	 individual attention and full participation
 	 appropriate access to equipment and facilities
 	 safe and enjoyable learning experiences for all students.
Subject-specific guidance
28 Design guide
Design situations
An understanding of design and the design cycle is an iterative and developmental process. As such,
students need support and structure in order to develop their ability to solve real-life design problems.
However, in earlier MYP years, this is not always possible and students do not always have the required
knowledge, understanding and skills.
In earlier years of the programme, students can complete design challenges that focus on particular strands
of an objective. Design challenges provide a key strategy to scaffold teaching and learning.
A design challenge is typically set within a contrived situation and has comparatively weak links to real
life. The nature of the challenge will be given to students by the teacher, who will lead them through the
design cycle process to develop a product. The challenge will be focused and specific with limited scope for
different outcomes.
In later years, MYP design courses should address design problems.
A design problem is a real-life problem that needs to be solved for a specific client or a target market. The
nature of the problem will be explored by students, who will consider a variety of ways to approach and
investigate possible solutions. The problem will include physical or functional requirements that all feasible
solutions must meet. Real-life situations that are relevant to students  lives and local reality pose interesting
and provoking problems to solve.
Recommended design tasks
The use of different types of design tasks are recommended to frame teaching and learning in design.
The task types stated below are typical activities used to equip students with the knowledge, skills and
understanding needed to successfully design solutions to problems. They are designed to give opportunity
for students to explore the design cycle and to gain experience of how design relates to real life.
Design project
The design project is a compulsory component of all MYP design courses.
This task must be assessed using all four criteria. It must be presented as a design folder that is clearly
divided into four sections: one per criterion. It must begin with the student s inquiry into the problem and
end with the evaluation of the product/solution. Students are presented with a design situation by the
teacher, from which they identify their own problem.
Other recommended tasks include the product/system study and the design and make.
Effective use of information and communication
technology in design
Information and communication technology (ICT) involves the use of computers, its applications and
communication facilities in teaching and learning activities. Therefore, the use of ICT goes beyond MYP
design and extends to all the teaching and learning in all subjects across the curriculum. The effective use of
ICT is an approaches to learning (ATL) skill and, as such, schools must ensure that a whole-school approach
is in place to allow students to develop information technology literacy and become competent users of
computers.
Subject-specific guidance
Design guide 29
Depending upon the school s resources, ICT should be used whenever appropriate:
 	 as a means of expanding students  knowledge of the world in which they live
 	 as a channel for developing concepts and skills
 	 as a powerful communication tool.
The use of ICT does not necessarily involve the use of the design cycle. ICT is a tool, which can be used in
digital and product design courses to develop solutions to problems. While design teachers may be given
responsibility by their school for helping students develop ICT literacy, teaching and learning ICT skills
should not be confused with, or take the place of, any design course.
Subject-specific guidance on design tasks and the use of ICT in the design cycle is available in the
teacher support material (TSM) on the online curriculum centre (OCC).
30 Design guide
Assessed curriculum
Alignment of objectives and criteria
In the MYP, assessment is closely aligned with the written and taught curriculum. Each strand from MYP
design has a corresponding strand in the assessment criteria for this subject group. Figure 5 illustrates this
alignment and the increasingly complex demands for student performance at higher levels of achievement.
Achievement
level
Level descriptor
0 The student does not reach a standard identified by any of the descriptors
below.
1 2 The student:
i. lists some basic design specifications for the design of a solution
ii. presents one design, which can be interpreted by others
iii. creates incomplete planning drawings/diagrams.
3 4 The student:
i. lists some design specifications, which relate to the success criteria for
the design of a solution
ii. presents a few feasible designs, using an appropriate medium(s) or
annotation, which can be interpreted by others
iii. justifies the selection of the chosen design with reference to the
design specification
iv. creates planning drawings/diagrams or lists requirements for the
creation of the chosen solution.
5 6 The student:
i. develops design specifications which outline the success criteria for
the design of a solution
ii. develops a range of feasible design ideas using an appropriate
medium(s) and annotation which can be interpreted by others
iii. presents the chosen design and justifies it s selection with reference
to the design specification
iv. develops accurate planning drawings/diagrams and lists requirements
for the creation of the chosen solution.
7 8 The student:
i. develops detailed design specifications, which explain the success
criteria for the design of a solution based on the analysis of the research
ii. develops a range of feasible design ideas, using an appropriate
medium(s) and detailed annotation, which can be correctly
interpreted by others
iii. presents the chosen design and justifies fully and critically it s
selection with detailed reference to the design specification
iv. develops accurate and detailed planning drawings/diagrams and
outlines requirements for the creation of the chosen solution.
B: Developing ideas
Students write a detailed specification
which drives the development of a solution.
The solution is presented in detail.
In order to reach the aims of design,
students should be able to:
i. develop design specifications which
clearly states the success criteria for
the design of a solution
ii. develop a range of feasible design
i d e a s , w h i c h c a n b e c o r r e c t l y
interpreted by others
iii. present the chosen design and justify
its selection
iv. d eve l o p a ccu r ate a n d d e t a il e d
planning drawings/diagrams and
outline the requirements for the
creation of the chosen solution.
Figure 5
Design objectives and criteria alignment
Design guide 31
Assessed curriculum
Assessment criteria overview
Assessment for design courses in all years programme is criterion-related, based on four equally weighted
assessment criteria:
Criterion A Inquiring and analysing Maximum 8
Criterion B Developing ideas Maximum 8
Criterion C Creating the solution Maximum 8
Criterion D Evaluating Maximum 8
Subject groups must address all strands of all four assessment criteria at least twice in each year of
the MYP.
In the MYP, subject group objectives correspond to assessment criteria. Each criterion has nine possible
levels of achievement (0 8), divided into four bands that generally represent limited (1 2); adequate (3 4);
substantial (5 6); and excellent (7 8) performance. Each band has its own unique descriptor, which teachers
use to make  best-fit  judgments about students  progress and achievement.
This guide provides the required assessment criteria for years 1, 3 and 5 of MYP design. In response to
national or local requirements, schools may add criteria and use additional models of assessment. Schools
must use the appropriate assessment criteria as published in this guide to report students  final achievement
in the programme.
Teachers clarify the expectations for each summative assessment task with direct reference to these
assessment criteria. Task-specific clarifications should clearly explain what students are expected to know
and do. They might be in the form of:
 	 a task-specific version of the required assessment criteria
 	 a face-to-face or virtual classroom discussion
 	 a detailed task sheet or assignment.
32 Design guide
Assessed curriculum
Design assessment criteria: Year 1
Criterion A: Inquiring and analysing
Maximum: 8
At the end of year 1, students should be able to:
i. explain and justify the need for a solution to a problem
ii. state and prioritize the main points of research needed to develop a solution to the problem
iii. describe the main features of one existing product that inspires a solution to the problem
iv. present the main findings of relevant research.
Achievement level Level descriptor
0 The student does not reach a standard described by any of the descriptors below.
1 2
The student:
i. states the need for a solution to a problem
ii. states the findings of research.
3 4
The student:
i. outlines the need for a solution to a problem
ii. states some points of research needed to develop a solution, with some
guidance
iii. states the main features of an existing product that inspires a solution to
the problem
iv. outlines some of the main findings of research.
5 6
The student:
i. explains the need for a solution to a problem
ii. states and prioritizes the main points of research needed to develop a
solution to the problem, with some guidance
iii. outlines the main features of an existing product that inspires a solution
to the problem
iv. outlines the main findings of relevant research.
7 8
The student:
i. explains and justifies the need for a solution to a problem
ii. states and prioritizes the main points of research needed to develop a
solution to the problem, with minimal guidance
iii. describes the main features of an existing product that inspires a solution
to the problem
iv. presents the main findings of relevant research.
Design assessment criteria: Year 1
Design guide 33
Criterion B: Developing ideas
Maximum: 8
At the end of year 1, students should be able to:
i. develop a list of success criteria for the solution
ii. present feasible design ideas, which can be correctly interpreted by others
iii. present the chosen design
iv. create a planning drawing/diagram which outlines the main details for making the chosen solution.
Achievement level Level descriptor
0 The student does not reach a standard described by any of the descriptors below.
1 2
The student:
i. states one basic success criterion for a solution
ii. presents one design idea, which can be interpreted by others
iii. creates an incomplete planning drawing/diagram.
3 4
The student:
i. states a few success criteria for the solution
ii. presents more than one design idea, using an appropriate medium(s) or
labels key features, which can be interpreted by others
iii. states the key features of the chosen design
iv. creates a planning drawing/diagram or lists requirements for the creation
of the chosen solution.
5 6
The student:
i. develops a few success criteria for the solution
ii. presents a few feasible design ideas, using an appropriate medium(s) and
labels key features, which can be interpreted by others
iii. presents the chosen design stating the key features
iv. creates a planning drawing/diagram and lists the main details for the
creation of the chosen solution.
7 8
The student:
i. develops a list of success criteria for the solution
ii. presents feasible design ideas, using an appropriate medium(s) and
outlines the key features, which can be correctly interpreted by others
iii. presents the chosen design describing the key features
iv. creates a planning drawing/diagram, which outlines the main details for
making the chosen solution.
Design assessment criteria: Year 1
34 Design guide
Criterion C: Creating the solution
Maximum: 8
At the end of year 1, students should be able to:
i. outline a plan, which considers the use of resources and time, sufficient for peers to be able to follow
to create the solution
ii. demonstrate excellent technical skills when making the solution
iii. follow the plan to create the solution, which functions as intended list the changes made to the chosen
design and plan when making the solution
iv. present the solution as a whole.
Achievement level Level descriptor
0 The student does not reach a standard described by any of the descriptors below.
1 2
The student:
i. demonstrates minimal technical skills when making the solution
ii. creates the solution, which functions poorly and is presented in an
incomplete form.
3 4
The student:
i. lists the main steps in a plan that contains some details, resulting in peers
having difficulty following the plan to create the solution
ii. demonstrates satisfactory technical skills when making the solution
iii. creates the solution, which partially functions and is adequately
presented
iv. states one change made to the chosen design or plan when making the
solution.
5 6
The student:
i. lists the steps in a plan, which considers time and resources, resulting in
peers being able to follow the plan to create the solution
ii. demonstrates competent technical skills when making the solution
iii. creates the solution, which functions as intended and is presented
appropriately
iv. states one change made to the chosen design and plan when making
the solution.
7 8
The student:
i. outlines a plan, which considers the use of resources and time, sufficient
for peers to be able to follow to create the solution
ii. demonstrates excellent technical skills when making the solution
iii. follows the plan to create the solution, which functions as intended and
is presented appropriately
iv. lists the changes made to the chosen design and plan when making the
solution.
Design assessment criteria: Year 1
Design guide 35
Criterion D: Evaluating
Maximum: 8
At the end of year 1, students should be able to:
i. outline simple, relevant testing methods, which generate data, to measure the success of the solution
ii. outline the success of the solution against the design specification
iii. outline how the solution could be improved
iv. outline the impact of the solution on the client/target audience.
Achievement level Level descriptor
0 The student does not reach a standard described by any of the descriptors below.
1 2
The student:
i. defines a testing method, which is used to measure the success of the
solution
ii. states the success of the solution.
3 4
The student:
i. defines a relevant testing method, which generates data, to measure
the success of the solution
ii. states the success of the solution against the design specification based
on the results of one relevant test
iii. states one way in which the solution could be improved
iv. states one way in which the solution can impact the client/target
audience.
5 6
The student:
i. defines relevant testing methods, which generate data, to measure the
success of the solution
ii. states the success of the solution against the design specification based
on relevant product testing
iii. outlines one way in which the solution could be improved
iv. outlines the impact of the solution on the client/target audience, with
guidance.
7 8
The student:
i. outlines simple, relevant testing methods, which generate data, to
measure the success of the solution
ii. outlines the success of the solution against the design specification
based on authentic product testing
iii. outlines how the solution could be improved
iv. outlines the impact of the solution on the client/target audience.
36 Design guide
Assessed curriculum
Design assessment criteria: Year 3
Criterion A: Inquiring and analysing
Maximum: 8
At the end of year 3, students should be able to:
i. explain and justify the need for a solution to a problem
ii. construct a research plan, which states and prioritizes the primary and secondary research needed to
develop a solution to the problem
iii. analyse a group of similar products that inspire a solution to the problem
iv. develop a design brief, which presents the analysis of relevant research.
Achievement level Level descriptor
0 The student does not reach a standard described by any of the descriptors below.
1 2
The student:
i. states the need for a solution to a problem
ii. states some of the main findings of relevant research.
3 4
The student:
i. outlines the need for a solution to a problem
ii. states the research needed to develop a solution to the problem, with
some guidance
iii. outlines one existing product that inspires a solution to the problem
iv. develops a basic design brief, which outlines some of relevant research.
5 6
The student:
i. explains the need for a solution to a problem
ii. constructs a research plan, which states and prioritizes the primary and
secondary research needed to develop a solution to the problem, with
some guidance
iii. describes a group of similar products that inspire a solution to the
problem
iv. develops a design brief, which outlines the findings of relevant research.
7 8
The student:
i. explains and justifies the need for a solution to a problem
ii. constructs a research plan, which states and prioritizes the primary
and secondary research needed to develop a solution to the problem
independently
iii. analyses a group of similar products that inspire a solution to the problem
iv. develops a design brief, which presents the analysis of relevant research.
Design assessment criteria: Year 3
Design guide 37
Criterion B: Developing ideas
Maximum: 8
At the end of year 3, students should be able to:
i. develop a design specification which outlines the success criteria for the design of a solution based on
the data collected
ii. present a range of feasible design ideas, which can be correctly interpreted by others
iii. present the chosen design and outline the reasons for its selection
iv. develop accurate planning drawings/diagrams and outline requirements for the creation of the
chosen solution.
Achievement level Level descriptor
0 The student does not reach a standard described by any of the descriptors below.
1 2
The student:
i. lists a few basic success criteria for the design of a solution
ii. presents one design idea, which can be interpreted by others
iii. creates incomplete planning drawings/diagrams.
3 4
The student:
i. constructs a list of the success criteria for the design of a solution
ii. presents a few feasible design ideas, using an appropriate medium(s) or
explains key features, which can be interpreted by others
iii. outlines the main reasons for choosing the design with reference to the
design specification
iv. creates planning drawings/diagrams or lists requirements for the chosen
solution.
5 6
The student:
i. develops design specifications, which identify the success criteria for the
design of a solution
ii. presents a range of feasible design ideas, using an appropriate
medium(s) and explains key features, which can be interpreted by others
iii. presents the chosen design and outlines the main reasons for its
selection with reference to the design specification
iv. develops accurate planning drawings/diagrams and lists requirements
for the creation of the chosen solution.
7 8
The student:
i. develops a design specification which outlines the success criteria for
the design of a solution based on the data collected
ii. presents a range of feasible design ideas, using an appropriate medium(s)
and annotation, which can be correctly interpreted by others
iii. presents the chosen design and outlines the reasons for its selection
with reference to the design specification
iv. develops accurate planning drawings/diagrams and outlines
requirements for the creation of the chosen solution.
Design assessment criteria: Year 3
38 Design guide
Criterion C: Creating the solution
Maximum: 8
At the end of year 3, students should be able to:
i. construct a logical plan, which outlines the efficient use of time and resources, sufficient for peers to
be able to follow to create the solution
ii. demonstrate excellent technical skills when making the solution
iii. follow the plan to create the solution, which functions as intended explain changes made to the
chosen design and the plan when making the solution.
iv. present the solution as a whole
Achievement level Level descriptor
0 The student does not reach a standard described by any of the descriptors below.
1 2
The student:
i. demonstrates minimal technical skills when making the solution
ii. creates the solution, which functions poorly and is presented in an
incomplete form.
3 4
The student:
i. outlines each step in a plan that contains some details, resulting in peers
having difficulty following the plan to create the solution
ii. demonstrates satisfactory technical skills when making the solution
iii. creates the solution, which partially functions and is adequately
presented
iv. outlines changes made to the chosen design or plan when making the
solution.
5 6
The student:
i. constructs a plan, which considers time and resources, sufficient for
peers to be able to follow to create the solution
ii. demonstrates competent technical skills when making the solution
iii. creates the solution, which functions as intended and is presented
appropriately
iv. outlines changes made to the chosen design and plan when making the
solution.
7 8
The student:
i. constructs a logical plan, which outlines the efficient use of time and
resources, sufficient for peers to be able to follow to create the solution
ii. demonstrates excellent technical skills when making the solution
iii. follows the plan to create the solution, which functions as intended and
is presented appropriately
iv. explains changes made to the chosen design and plan when making the
solution.
Design assessment criteria: Year 3
Design guide 39
Criterion D: Evaluating
Maximum: 8
At the end of year 3, students should be able to:
i. describe detailed and relevant testing methods, which generate accurate data, to measure the success
of the solution
ii. explain the success of the solution against the design specification
iii. describe how the solution could be improved
iv. describe the impact of the solution on the client/target audience.
Achievement level Level descriptor
0 The student does not reach a standard described by any of the descriptors below.
1 2
The student:
i. describes a testing method, which is used to measure the success of the
solution
ii. states the success of the solution.
3 4
The student:
i. describes a relevant testing method, which generates data, to measure
the success of the solution
ii. outlines the success of the solution against the design specification
based on relevant product testing
iii. lists the ways in which the solution could be improved
iv. outlines the impact of the solution on the client/target audience.
5 6
The student:
i. describes relevant testing methods, which generate data, to measure
the success of the solution
ii. describes the success of the solution against the design specification
based on relevant product testing
iii. outlines how the solution could be improved
iv. describes the impact of the solution on the client/target audience, with
guidance.
7 8
The student:
i. describes detailed and relevant testing methods, which generate
accurate data, to measure the success of the solution
ii. explains the success of the solution against the design specification
based on authentic product testing
iii. describes how the solution could be improved
iv. describes the impact of the solution on the client/target audience.
40 Design guide
Assessed curriculum
Design assessment criteria: Year 5
Criterion A: Inquiring and analysing
Maximum: 8
Students identify the need for a solution to a problem. At the end of year 5, students should be able to:
i. explain and justify the need for a solution to a problem for a specified client/target audience
ii. identify and prioritize primary and secondary research needed to develop a solution to the problem
iii. analyse a range of existing products that inspire a solution to the problem
iv. develop a detailed design brief, which summarizes the analysis of relevant research.
Achievement level Level descriptor
0 The student does not reach a standard described by any of the descriptors below.
1 2
The student:
i. states the need for a solution to a problem for a specified client/target
audience
ii. develops a basic design brief, which states the findings of relevant
research.
3 4
The student:
i. outlines the need for a solution to a problem for a specified client/target
audience
ii. outlines a research plan, which identifies primary and secondary
research needed to develop a solution to the problem, with some
guidance
iii. analyses one existing product that inspires a solution to the problem
iv. develops a design brief, which outlines the analysis of relevant research.
5 6
The student:
i. explains the need for a solution to a problem for a specified client/target
audience
ii. constructs a research plan, which identifies and prioritizes primary and
secondary research needed to develop a solution to the problem, with
some guidance
iii. analyses a range of existing products that inspire a solution to the
problem
iv. develops a design brief, which explains the analysis of relevant research.
Design assessment criteria: Year 5
Design guide 41
Achievement level Level descriptor
7 8
The student:
i. explains and justifies the need for a solution to a problem for a client/
target audience
ii. constructs a detailed research plan, which identifies and prioritizes
the primary and secondary research needed to develop a solution to the
problem independently
iii. analyses a range of existing products that inspire a solution to the
problem in detail
iv. develops a detailed design brief, which summarizes the analysis of
relevant research.
Design assessment criteria: Year 5
42 Design guide
Criterion B: Developing ideas
Maximum: 8
Students develop a solution. At the end of year 5, students should be able to:
i. develop design specifications, which clearly states the success criteria for the design of a solution
ii. develop a range of feasible design ideas, which can be correctly interpreted by others
iii. present the chosen design and justify its selection
iv. develop accurate and detailed planning drawings/diagrams and outline the requirements for the
creation of the chosen solution.
Achievement level Level descriptor
0 The student does not reach a standard described by any of the descriptors below.
1 2
The student:
i. lists some basic design specifications for the design of a solution
ii. presents one design, which can be interpreted by others
iii. creates incomplete planning drawings/diagrams.
3 4
The student:
i. lists some design specifications, which relate to the success criteria for
the design of a solution
ii. presents a few feasible designs, using an appropriate medium(s) or
annotation, which can be interpreted by others
iii. justifies the selection of the chosen design with reference to the design
specification
iv. creates planning drawings/diagrams or lists requirements for the
creation of the chosen solution.
5 6
The student:
i. develops design specifications, which outline the success criteria for the
design of a solution
ii. develops a range of feasible design ideas, using an appropriate
medium(s) and annotation, which can be interpreted by others
iii. presents the chosen design and justifies its selection with reference to
the design specification
iv. develops accurate planning drawings/diagrams and lists requirements
for the creation of the chosen solution.
Design assessment criteria: Year 5
Design guide 43
Achievement level Level descriptor
7 8
The student:
i. develops detailed design specifications, which explain the success
criteria for the design of a solution based on the analysis of the research
ii. develops a range of feasible design ideas, using an appropriate
medium(s) and detailed annotation, which can be correctly interpreted
by others
iii. presents the chosen design and justifies fully and critically its selection
with detailed reference to the design specification
iv. develops accurate and detailed planning drawings/diagrams and
outlines requirements for the creation of the chosen solution.
Design assessment criteria: Year 5
44 Design guide
Criterion C: Creating the solution
Maximum: 8
Students create a solution. At the end of year 5, students should be able to:
i. construct a logical plan, which describes the efficient use of time and resources, sufficient for peers to
be able to follow to create the solution
ii. demonstrate excellent technical skills when making the solution
iii. follow the plan to create the solution, which functions as intended
iv. fully justify changes made to the chosen design and plan when making the solution
a. present the solution as a whole
Achievement level Level descriptor
0 The student does not reach a standard described by any of the descriptors below.
1 2
The student:
i. demonstrates minimal technical skills when making the solution
ii. creates the solution, which functions poorly and is presented in an
incomplete form.
3 4
The student:
i. constructs a plan that contains some production details, resulting in
peers having difficulty following the plan
ii. demonstrates satisfactory technical skills when making the solution
iii. creates the solution, which partially functions and is adequately
presented
iv. outlines changes made to the chosen design and plan when making the
solution.
5 6
The student:
i. constructs a logical plan, which considers time and resources, sufficient
for peers to be able to follow to create the solution
ii. demonstrates competent technical skills when making the solution
iii. creates the solution, which functions as intended and is presented
appropriately
iv. describes changes made to the chosen design and plan when making the
solution.
7 8
The student:
i. constructs a detailed and logical plan, which describes the efficient
use of time and resources, sufficient for peers to be able to follow to
create the solution
ii. demonstrates excellent technical skills when making the solution.
iii. follows the plan to create the solution, which functions as intended and
is presented appropriately
iv. fully justifies changes made to the chosen design and plan when making
the solution.
Design assessment criteria: Year 5
Design guide 45
Criterion D: Evaluating
Maximum: 8
Students evaluate the solution. At the end of year 5, students should be able to:
i. design detailed and relevant testing methods, which generate data, to measure the success of the
solution
ii. critically evaluate the success of the solution against the design specification
iii. explain how the solution could be improved
iv. explain the impact of the solution on the client/target audience.
Achievement level Level descriptor
0 The student does not reach a standard described by any of the descriptors below.
1 2
The student:
i. designs a testing method, which is used to measure the success of the
solution
ii. states the success of the solution.
3 4
The student:
i. designs a relevant testing method, which generates data, to measure
the success of the solution
ii. outlines the success of the solution against the design specification
based on relevant product testing
iii. outlines how the solution could be improved
iv. outlines the impact of the solution on the client/target audience.
5 6
The student:
i. designs relevant testing methods, which generate data, to measure the
success of the solution
ii. explains the success of the solution against the design specification
based on relevant product testing
iii. describes how the solution could be improved
iv. explains the impact of the solution on the client/target audience, with
guidance.
7 8
The student:
i. designs detailed and relevant testing methods, which generate data,
to measure the success of the solution
ii. critically evaluates the success of the solution against the design
specification based on authentic product testing
iii. explains how the solution could be improved
iv. explains the impact of the product on the client/target audience.
Design assessment criteria: Year 5
46 Design guide
Notes for criterion A
 	 When developing the design brief, students should concisely summarize only the useful and
relevant information they have found through their research. They will present this information in
their own words. Students should not copy and paste information from sources without analysis or
indicating relevance.
Notes for criterion B
 	 In MYP design, a feasible idea is one that the student can create within the allocated time with the
tools and facilities available to them.
 	 Examples of  planning drawings/diagrams  for digital design solutions include website navigation
maps, interface layout aesthetic considerations (websites), detailed sketches (graphic design),
detailed storyboards (video editing and animations), and so on.
 	 Examples of  planning drawings/diagrams  for product design solutions include scale drawing
with measurements (orthographic), part and assembly drawings, exploded drawings, recipes,
cutting plans, and so on.
Notes for criterion C
 	 When changes have been made to the solution, students must describe and justify each change. If
there are no changes to the plan, students are not required to describe or justify any changes.
 	 Technical skills: A student s level of technical skill can be determined using the following two factors:
  the complexity of skill demonstrated
  the level of guidance needed from the teacher to complete the task.
The teacher should determine an age-appropriate level of technical skill demonstrated by the student
using a  best-fit  approach. A clarification is detailed below.
Minimal technical skills: Simple skills are demonstrated and the student requires a great deal of
assistance after they have received initial instruction on how to use tools.
Satisfactory technical skills: Simple and complex skills are demonstrated and the student requires
some assistance after they have received initial instruction on how to use complex tools.
Competent technical skills: Complex skills are demonstrated and the student generally works
independently, requiring some guidance after initial instruction.
Excellent technical skills: A wide range of complex skills are demonstrated and the student works
independently, requiring minimal guidance after initial instruction.
Notes for criterion D
 	 Product testing: This is a stage in the design process where versions of products (for example,
prototypes) are tested against the design need (specification), applied to the context and
presented to the end-user or target audience. These tests may include the collection and analysis
of data. Types of testing include user trial and observation: (usability and intuitiveness), field/
performance test: (functionality and performance), expert appraisal: (beta testing, consumer
testing)
 	 Authentic tests: The tests are relevant to the project and are completed by appropriate testers to
gain high-quality quantitative and qualitative feedback.
Design guide 47
Assessed curriculum
eAssessment
Students seeking IB MYP Results for MYP design courses complete an ePortfolio in which they can
demonstrate their achievement of subject group objectives. The portfolio is marked by the student s
teacher(s), following the school s internal standardization of tasks and judgments against the criteria for
year 5. Successful results can contribute to students  attainment of the IB MYP Certificate.
A process of external moderation assures accurate and consistently applied standards, as set forth in Guide
to MYP to eAssessment.
48 Design guide
Appendices
Related concepts in design
Related concept Definition
Adaptation Adaptation involves incorporating ideas found in one product into the
development of a new product.
Collaboration Collaboration involves two or more people sharing expertise and experience,
working together to solve a problem and realize shared goals.
Ergonomics Ergonomics is the application of scientific information and understanding of how
humans relate to products, systems, interfaces and environments.
Evaluation In design, evaluation involves the gathering and processing of data to determine
an action. Evaluation involves feedback, which can be used to control, revise or
modify.
Form Form concerns the overall shape and configuration of a product. It relates to
aspects such as aesthetics, shape, colour, and texture.
Function The function of a solution refers to what it has been designed to do and how
effective it is at enabling that action to be performed.
Innovation Innovation is the successful diffusion of an invention into the marketplace.
Invention An invention is an entirely novel product or a feature of a product that is unique.
Markets and
trends
Markets can be considered as sectors and segments comprised of groups of
individuals with similar needs. Trends involve short- and long-term patterns of
consumer behaviour.
Perspective Perspective relates to the point of view of various stakeholders involved in solving
a problem. Stakeholders can have different perspectives and can include clients,
target audiences, focus groups, consumers, manufacturers and experts.
Resources Resources relate to the supply of a commodity. In MYP design, these commodities
can be classified as information, materials and equipment.
Sustainability Sustainability is the capacity to endure, which can have environmental, economic
and social dimensions. In MYP design, sustainability can be considered in the
following ways.
 	 Green and Eco-design
 	 Sustainable consumption
 	 Sustainable design
 	 Sustainable development
 	 Sustainable innovation
 	 Sustainable production
Design guide 49
Appendices
Design glossary
Term Definition
Appropriate
quality
This is the best product/solution that the student can produce, taking into account
the resources available, the skills and techniques he or she has used, his or her
educational development, how the product/solution addresses the identified
need, and aspects of safety and ergonomics.
Authentic tests The tests are relevant to the project and are completed by appropriate testers to
gain high-quality quantitative and qualitative feedback.
Client An individual, a company or organization that commissions a designer to develop
a solution to a personal or particular design problem.
Computer-aided
design (CAD)
The use of computers to design products/solutions.
Computer-aided
manufacture
(CAM)
The use of computers to cut materials or create components, normally using CAD
or numeric control.
Design brief The student s response to the design situation, based on his or her research,
detailing how he or she intends to solve the problem. This will summarize the
relevant findings from his or her research, and inform the development of his or
her design specification.
Design situation A short introduction to a project written by the teacher or client, which frames a
design project in terms of the nature of the problem to be addressed or an area
from which students will identify a challenge or problem that needs to be solved.
The design situation is drawn from the statement of inquiry and presents the
scope of a project.
Design
specification
A detailed description of the conditions, requirements and restrictions with which
a design must comply. This is a precise and accurate list of facts, such as conditions,
dimensions, materials, process and methods, that are important for the designer
and for the user. All appropriate solutions will need to comply with the design
specification.
Expert appraisal A type of product testing, which relies on the knowledge of an expert in the
operation of a product. This can include interviewing an expert, beta testing and
consumer testing.
Field test A type of product testing, which tests the performance of a new product under
the conditions it will be used, which normally focuses on aspects of functionality
(durability, robustness, suitability to its environment, and so on).
Performance test An evaluation of the actual performance of a product within the task or learning
objective using the conditions under which it will be performed and the absolute
standard for acceptable performance.
Design glossary
50 Design guide
Term Definition
Planning
drawings/
diagrams
Detailed drawings or diagrams, which include details of a product s components
and how they are combined/assembled.
Target audience A group of similar users who require a solution to a common problem or a product
that fills a common need or want.
User trial A type of product test carried out by allowing the target market to interact with
the product/solution. The observation of people using a product and collection
of comments from people who have used a product. This normally focuses on
usability and intuitive interaction.
Design guide 51
Appendices
MYP command terms for design
Term Definition
Analyse Break down in order to bring out the essential elements or structure. To identify
parts and relationships, and to interpret information to reach conclusions.
Construct Display information in a diagrammatic or logical form.
Create To evolve from one s own thought or imagination, as a work or an invention.
Define Give the precise meaning of a word, phrase, concept or physical quantity.
Demonstrate Prove or make clear by reasoning or evidence, illustrating with examples or
practical application.
Describe Give a detailed account or picture of a situation, event, pattern or process.
Design Produce a plan, simulation or model.
Develop To improve incrementally, elaborate or expand in detail. Evolve to a more advanced
or effective state.
Evaluate Assess the implications and limitations; make judgments about the ideas, works,
solutions or methods in relation to selected criteria.
Explain Give a detailed account including reasons or causes.
Identify Provide an answer from a number of possibilities. Recognize and state briefly a
distinguishing fact or feature.
Justify Give valid reasons or evidence to support an answer or conclusion.
List Give a sequence of brief answers with no explanation.
Outline Give a brief account.
Present Offer for display, observation, examination or consideration.
Prioritize Give relative importance to, or put in an order of preference.
State Give a specific name, value or other brief answer without explanation or
calculation.
Summarize Abstract a general theme or major point(s).
52 Design guide
Appendices
Selected reading
Aspelund, K. 2010. The Design Process. (Second Edition). New York, New York, USA. Fairchild Books.
Baxter, M. 1995. Product Design: Practical Methods for the Systematic Development of New Products. London,
UK. Chapman and Hall.
Bowles, C and Box, J. 2011. Undercover: User Experience Design. Berkeley, California, USA. New Riders.
Computer Science for fun. CS4FN. (Issues 1 13). Queen Mary University of London. http://www.cs4fn.org
(accessed 12 June 2013).
Cooper, A, Reimann, R and Cronin, D. 2007. About Face 3: The Essentials of Interaction Design. Indianapolis,
Indiana, USA. Wiley Publishing Inc.
Edgerton, D. 2008. The Shock of the Old: Technology and Global History Since 1900. (Paperback Edition).
London, UK. Profile books Ltd.
Heskett, J. 1980. Industrial Design. London, UK. Thames and Hudson Ltd.
Lanier, J. 2011. You Are Not A Gadget: A Manifesto. London, UK. Penguin books Ltd.
Lawson, B. 2005. How Designers Think: The Design Process Demystified. (Fourth Edition). Oxford, UK.
Architectural Press.
Papanek, V. 1997. Design for the Real World: Human Ecology and Social Change. (Second Edition). London, UK.
Thames and Hudson Ltd.
Powell, D. 1999. Presentation Techniques. (Seventh Edition). London, UK. Little, Brown and Company (UK).
Royal College of Art Schools technology Project. 2002. Advanced Manufacturing Design And Technology.
London, UK. Hodder and Staughton.
Sanders, M and McCormick, E. Human Factors in Engineering and Design. (Seventh Edition). Singapore.
McGraw Hill Book Inc.
Sparke, P. 1986. An Introduction to Design and Culture in the Twentieth Century. London, UK. Routledge.
The Design and Technology Association. 2010. Minimum Competencies for Trainees to Teach Design and
Technology in Secondary Schools. (Updated Version). Wellesbourne, UK. The Design and Technology
Association.
Webster, K and Johnson, C. 2010. Sense and Sustainability: Educating for a Circular Economy. (Second Edition).
TerraPreta in association with the Ellen MacArthur Foundation and InterfaceFLOR.
Williams, R. 2008. The Non-Designer s Design Book: Design and Typographical Principles for the Visual Novice.
(Third Edition). Berkeley, California, USA. Peachpit Press.